2023-clb-multisite/README.md, before:

# 2023 CLB Multisite

> :warning: **WARNING**  
> This is still a work in progress!

This folder contains the pathology report data on lymphatic involvement in 372 patients with head and neck cancer, diagnosed and treated at the [Centre Léon Bérard] between 2001 and 2018.

The `raw.csv` data does contain patients which are duplicates of the patient records in the `2021-clb-oropharynx` folder, but they have been filtered out in the `data.csv` file.

[Centre Léon Bérard]: https://www.centreleonberard.fr/en


## Curation

TODO: Find out about that soon


## Online Interface

We provide a user-friendly and intuitive graphical user interface to view the dataset, which is available at https://lyprox.org/. The GUI has two main functionalities: the patient list and the dashboard. The patient list allows for viewing the characteristics of a patient, corresponding to one row of the csv file, in a visually appealing and intuitive way. The dashboard allows for filtering of the dataset. For example, the user may select all patients with primary tumors extending over the mid-sagittal plane with involvement of ipsilateral level III. The dashboard will then display the number or percentage of patients with metastases in each of the other LNLs.


## Description

The data is provided as a CSV-table containing one row for each of the 373 patients. The table has a header with three levels that describe the columns. Below we explain each column in the form of a list with three levels. So, for example, list entry 1.i.g refers to a column with the three-level header `patient | # | alcohol_abuse` and underneath it we report each patient's history of alcohol abuse.


## Columns

1. **`patient`**: This top-level header contains general patient information.
   1. **`#`**: The second level header for the `patient` columns is only a placeholder.
      1. **`id`**: The patient ID.
      2. **`institution`**: The institution where the patient was treated.
      3. **`sex`**: The biological sex of the patient.
      4. **`age`**: The age of the patient at the time of diagnosis.
      5. **`weight`**: The weight of the patient at the time of diagnosis.
      6. **`diagnose_date`**: The date of surgery, because the raw file does not specify a date of diagnosis.
      7. **`alcohol_abuse`**: Whether the patient was abusingly drinking alcohol at the time of diagnosis.
      8. **`nicotine_abuse`**: Whether the patient was smoking nicotine at the time of diagnosis.
      9. **`hpv_status`**: The HPV p16 status of the patient.
      10. **`neck_dissection`**: Whether the patient underwent a neck dissection. In this dataset, all patients underwent a neck dissection.
      11. **`tnm_edition`**: The edition of the TNM classification used.
      12. **`n_stage`**: The pN category of the patient (pathologically assessed).
      13. **`m_stage`**: The M category of the patient.
      14. **`extracapsular`**: Whether the patient had extracapsular spread. In this dataset, this information is only globally available, not for each individual lymph node level.
2. **`tumor`**: This top-level header contains general tumor information.
   1. **`1`**: The second level header enumerates sychronous tumors.
      1. **`location`**: The location of the tumor. This is empty for all patients, because we can later infer it from the subsite's ICD-O-3 code.
      2. **`subsite`**: The subsite of the tumor, specified by ICD-O-3 code.
      3. **`central`**: Whether the tumor is located centrally w.r.t. the mid-sagittal plane.
      4. **`extension`**: Whether the tumor extended over the mid-sagittal line.
      5. **`volume`**: The volume of the tumor in cm^3.
      6. **`stage_prefix`**: The prefix of the T category.
      7. **`t_stage`**: The T category of the tumor.
3. **`pathology`**: This top-level header contains information from the pathology that received the LNLs resected during the neck dissection.
   1. **`info`**: This second-level header contains general information.
      1. **`date`**: The date of the pathology report (same as surgery).
   2. **`ipsi`**: This reports the involvement of the ipsilateral LNLs.
      1. **`III`**: For example, this column reports the involvement of the ipsilateral LNL III.
   3. **`contra`**: This reports the involvement of the contralateral LNLs.
      1. **`V`**: This column reports the pathologic involvement of the contralateral LNL V.
4. **`diagnostic_consensus`**: This top-level header contains information about the diagnostic consensus, which we assumed to be negative for each LNL that was not resected during the neck dissection.
   1. **`info`**: This second-level header contains general information.
      1. **`date`**: The date of the diagnostic consensus (same as surgery).
   2. **`ipsi`**: This reports the diagnostic consensus of the ipsilateral LNLs.
      1. **`Ib`**: E.g., this column reports the diagnostic consensus of the ipsilateral LNL Ib.
   3. **`contra`**: This reports the diagnostic consensus of the contralateral LNLs.
      1. **`III`**: Under this column, we report the diagnostic consensus of the contralateral LNL III.
5. **`total_dissected`**: This top-level header contains information about the total number of dissected and pathologically investigated lymph nodes per LNL.
   1. **`info`**: This second-level header contains general information.
      1. **`date`**: The date of the neck dissection.
   2. **`ipsi`**: This reports the total number of dissected lymph nodes per ipsilateral LNL.
      1. **`II`**: For instance, this column reports the total number of dissected lymph nodes in ipsilateral LNL II.
   3. **`contra`**: This reports the total number of dissected lymph nodes per contralateral LNL.
      1. **`VII`**: While this column reports the total number of dissected lymph nodes in contralateral LNL VII.
6. **`positive_dissected`**: This top-level header contains information about the number of dissected lymph nodes per LNL that were pathologically found to be positive.
   1. **`info`**: This second-level header contains general information.
      1. **`date`**: The date of the neck dissection.
   2. **`ipsi`**: This reports the number of dissected lymph nodes per ipsilateral LNL that were pathologically found to be positive.
      1. **`IV`**: Here, we report the number of metastatic lymph nodes in ipsilateral LNL IV.
   3. **`contra`**: This reports the number of dissected lymph nodes per contralateral LNL that were pathologically found to be positive.
      1. **`Ia`**: And this column reports the number of metastatic lymph nodes in contralateral LNL Ia.


---


## <kbd>module</kbd> `mapping`
Map the `raw.csv` data from the 2023-clb-multisite cohort to the `data.csv` file. 

This module defines how the command `lyscripts data lyproxify` (see [here](rmnldwg.github.io/lyscripts) for the documentation of the `lyscripts` module) should handle the `raw.csv` data that was extracted at the Centre Léon Bérard in order to transform it into a [LyProX](https://lyprox.org)-compatible `data.csv` file. 

The most important definitions in here are the list `EXCLUDE` and the dictionary `COLUMN_MAP` that defines how to construct the new columns based on the `raw.csv` data. They are described in more detail below: 


--- 

### <kbd>global</kbd> `EXCLUDE` 

List of tuples specifying which function to run for which columns to find out if patients/rows should be excluded in the lyproxified `data.csv`. 

The first element of each tuple is the flattened multi-index column name, the second element is the function to run on the column to determine if a patient/row should be excluded: 

```python
EXCLUDE = [
     (column_name, check_function),
]
``` 

Essentially, a row is excluded, if for that row `check_function(raw_data[column_name])` evaluates to `True`. 

More information can be found in the [documentation](https://rmnldwg.github.io/lyscripts/lyscripts/data/lyproxify.html#exclude_patients) of the `lyproxify` function. 


--- 

### <kbd>global</kbd> `COLUMN_MAP` 

This is the actual mapping dictionary that describes how to transform the `raw.csv` table into the `data.csv` table that can be fed into and understood by [LyProX](https://lyprox.org). 

See [here](https://rmnldwg.github.io/lyscripts/lyscripts/data/lyproxify.html#transform_to_lyprox) for details on how this dictionary is used by the `lyproxify` script. 

It contains a tree-like structure that is human-readable and mimics the tree of multi-level headers in the final `data.csv` file. For every column in the final `data.csv` file, the dictionary describes from which columns in the `raw.csv` file the data should be extracted and what function should be applied to it. 

It also contains a `__doc__` key for every sub-dictionary that describes what the respective column is about. This is used to generate the documentation for the `README.md` file of this data. 


--- 

**Global Variables**
---------------
- **TNM_COLS**
- **EXCLUDE**
- **COLUMN_MAP**

---

### <kbd>function</kbd> `smpl_date`

```python
smpl_date(entry: str) → str
```

Parse date from string. 


---

### <kbd>function</kbd> `smpl_diagnose`

```python
smpl_diagnose(entry: str | int, *_args, **_kwargs) → bool
```

Parse the diagnosis. 


---

### <kbd>function</kbd> `robust`

```python
robust(func: Callable) → Optional[Any]
```

Wrapper that makes any type-conversion function 'robust' by simply returning `None` whenever any exception is thrown. 


---

### <kbd>function</kbd> `get_subsite`

```python
get_subsite(entry: str, *_args, **_kwargs) → str | None
```

Get human-readable subsite from ICD-10 code. 


---

### <kbd>function</kbd> `parse_pathology`

```python
parse_pathology(entry, *_args, **_kwargs) → bool | None
```

Transform number of positive nodes to `True`, `False` or `None`. 


---

### <kbd>function</kbd> `set_diagnostic_consensus`

```python
set_diagnostic_consensus(entry, *_args, **_kwargs)
```

Return `False`, meaning 'healthy', when no entry about a resected LNL is available or when the pathology report says it was healhty. This is a hack to tackle the issue described here: 

https://github.com/rmnldwg/lyprox/issues/92 


---

### <kbd>function</kbd> `extract_hpv`

```python
extract_hpv(value: int | None, *_args, **_kwargs) → bool | None
```

Translate the HPV value to a boolean. 


---

### <kbd>function</kbd> `strip_letters`

```python
strip_letters(entry: str, *_args, **_kwargs) → int
```

Remove letters following a number. 


---

### <kbd>function</kbd> `clean_cat`

```python
clean_cat(cat: str) → int
```

Extract T or N category as integer from the respective string. I.e., turn 'pN2+' into 2. 


---

### <kbd>function</kbd> `get_tnm_info`

```python
get_tnm_info(ct7, cn7, pt7, pn7, ct8, cn8, pt8, pn8) → tuple[int, int, int, str]
```

Determine the TNM edition used based on which versions are available for T and/or N category. 


---

### <kbd>function</kbd> `get_t_category`

```python
get_t_category(*args, **_kwargs) → int
```

Extract the T-category. 


---

### <kbd>function</kbd> `get_n_category`

```python
get_n_category(*args, **_kwargs) → int
```

Extract the N-category. 


---

### <kbd>function</kbd> `get_tnm_version`

```python
get_tnm_version(*args, **_kwargs) → int
```

Extract the TNM version. 


---

### <kbd>function</kbd> `get_tnm_prefix`

```python
get_tnm_prefix(*args, **_kwargs) → str
```

Extract the TNM prefix. 


---

### <kbd>function</kbd> `check_excluded`

```python
check_excluded(column: pandas.core.series.Series) → Index
```

Check if a patient/row is excluded based on the content of a `column`. 

For the 2022 CLB multisite dataset this is the case when the first column with the three-level header `("Bauwens", "Database", "0_lvl_2")` is not empty or does not contain the character `'n'`.

Commit message:

add table of contents to all READMEs

2023-clb-multisite/README.md, after:

# 2023 CLB Multisite

> :warning: **WARNING**  
> This is still a work in progress!

This folder contains the pathology report data on lymphatic involvement in 372 patients with head and neck cancer, diagnosed and treated at the [Centre Léon Bérard] between 2001 and 2018.

The `raw.csv` data does contain patients which are duplicates of the patient records in the `2021-clb-oropharynx` folder, but they have been filtered out in the `data.csv` file.

[Centre Léon Bérard]: https://www.centreleonberard.fr/en


## Table of Contents

- [Curation](#curation)
- [Online Interface](#online-interface)
- [Data Description](#data-description)
- [Documentation of Columns](#documentation-of-columns)
- [Mapping Documentation](#mapping)


## Curation

TODO: Find out about that soon


## Online Interface

We provide a user-friendly and intuitive graphical user interface to view the dataset, which is available at https://lyprox.org/. The GUI has two main functionalities: the patient list and the dashboard. The patient list allows for viewing the characteristics of a patient, corresponding to one row of the csv file, in a visually appealing and intuitive way. The dashboard allows for filtering of the dataset. For example, the user may select all patients with primary tumors extending over the mid-sagittal plane with involvement of ipsilateral level III. The dashboard will then display the number or percentage of patients with metastases in each of the other LNLs.


## Data Description

The data is provided as a CSV-table containing one row for each of the 373 patients. The table has a header with three levels that describe the columns. Below we explain each column in the form of a list with three levels. So, for example, list entry 1.i.g refers to a column with the three-level header `patient | # | alcohol_abuse` and underneath it we report each patient's history of alcohol abuse.


## Documentation of Columns

1. **`patient`**: This top-level header contains general patient information.
   1. **`#`**: The second level header for the `patient` columns is only a placeholder.
      1. **`id`**: The patient ID.
      2. **`institution`**: The institution where the patient was treated.
      3. **`sex`**: The biological sex of the patient.
      4. **`age`**: The age of the patient at the time of diagnosis.
      5. **`weight`**: The weight of the patient at the time of diagnosis.
      6. **`diagnose_date`**: The date of surgery, because the raw file does not specify a date of diagnosis.
      7. **`alcohol_abuse`**: Whether the patient was abusingly drinking alcohol at the time of diagnosis.
      8. **`nicotine_abuse`**: Whether the patient was smoking nicotine at the time of diagnosis.
      9. **`hpv_status`**: The HPV p16 status of the patient.
      10. **`neck_dissection`**: Whether the patient underwent a neck dissection. In this dataset, all patients underwent a neck dissection.
      11. **`tnm_edition`**: The edition of the TNM classification used.
      12. **`n_stage`**: The pN category of the patient (pathologically assessed).
      13. **`m_stage`**: The M category of the patient.
      14. **`extracapsular`**: Whether the patient had extracapsular spread. In this dataset, this information is only globally available, not for each individual lymph node level.
2. **`tumor`**: This top-level header contains general tumor information.
   1. **`1`**: The second level header enumerates sychronous tumors.
      1. **`location`**: The location of the tumor. This is empty for all patients, because we can later infer it from the subsite's ICD-O-3 code.
      2. **`subsite`**: The subsite of the tumor, specified by ICD-O-3 code.
      3. **`central`**: Whether the tumor is located centrally w.r.t. the mid-sagittal plane.
      4. **`extension`**: Whether the tumor extended over the mid-sagittal line.
      5. **`volume`**: The volume of the tumor in cm^3.
      6. **`stage_prefix`**: The prefix of the T category.
      7. **`t_stage`**: The T category of the tumor.
3. **`pathology`**: This top-level header contains information from the pathology that received the LNLs resected during the neck dissection.
   1. **`info`**: This second-level header contains general information.
      1. **`date`**: The date of the pathology report (same as surgery).
   2. **`ipsi`**: This reports the involvement of the ipsilateral LNLs.
      1. **`III`**: For example, this column reports the involvement of the ipsilateral LNL III.
   3. **`contra`**: This reports the involvement of the contralateral LNLs.
      1. **`V`**: This column reports the pathologic involvement of the contralateral LNL V.
4. **`diagnostic_consensus`**: This top-level header contains information about the diagnostic consensus, which we assumed to be negative for each LNL that was not resected during the neck dissection.
   1. **`info`**: This second-level header contains general information.
      1. **`date`**: The date of the diagnostic consensus (same as surgery).
   2. **`ipsi`**: This reports the diagnostic consensus of the ipsilateral LNLs.
      1. **`Ib`**: E.g., this column reports the diagnostic consensus of the ipsilateral LNL Ib.
   3. **`contra`**: This reports the diagnostic consensus of the contralateral LNLs.
      1. **`III`**: Under this column, we report the diagnostic consensus of the contralateral LNL III.
5. **`total_dissected`**: This top-level header contains information about the total number of dissected and pathologically investigated lymph nodes per LNL.
   1. **`info`**: This second-level header contains general information.
      1. **`date`**: The date of the neck dissection.
   2. **`ipsi`**: This reports the total number of dissected lymph nodes per ipsilateral LNL.
      1. **`II`**: For instance, this column reports the total number of dissected lymph nodes in ipsilateral LNL II.
   3. **`contra`**: This reports the total number of dissected lymph nodes per contralateral LNL.
      1. **`VII`**: While this column reports the total number of dissected lymph nodes in contralateral LNL VII.
6. **`positive_dissected`**: This top-level header contains information about the number of dissected lymph nodes per LNL that were pathologically found to be positive.
   1. **`info`**: This second-level header contains general information.
      1. **`date`**: The date of the neck dissection.
   2. **`ipsi`**: This reports the number of dissected lymph nodes per ipsilateral LNL that were pathologically found to be positive.
      1. **`IV`**: Here, we report the number of metastatic lymph nodes in ipsilateral LNL IV.
   3. **`contra`**: This reports the number of dissected lymph nodes per contralateral LNL that were pathologically found to be positive.
      1. **`Ia`**: And this column reports the number of metastatic lymph nodes in contralateral LNL Ia.


---

<a id="mapping"></a>

## <kbd>module</kbd> `mapping`
Map the `raw.csv` data from the 2023-clb-multisite cohort to the `data.csv` file. 

This module defines how the command `lyscripts data lyproxify` (see [here](rmnldwg.github.io/lyscripts) for the documentation of the `lyscripts` module) should handle the `raw.csv` data that was extracted at the Centre Léon Bérard in order to transform it into a [LyProX](https://lyprox.org)-compatible `data.csv` file. 

The most important definitions in here are the list `EXCLUDE` and the dictionary `COLUMN_MAP` that defines how to construct the new columns based on the `raw.csv` data. They are described in more detail below: 


--- 

### <kbd>global</kbd> `EXCLUDE` 

List of tuples specifying which function to run for which columns to find out if patients/rows should be excluded in the lyproxified `data.csv`. 

The first element of each tuple is the flattened multi-index column name, the second element is the function to run on the column to determine if a patient/row should be excluded: 

```python
EXCLUDE = [
     (column_name, check_function),
]
``` 

Essentially, a row is excluded, if for that row `check_function(raw_data[column_name])` evaluates to `True`. 

More information can be found in the [documentation](https://rmnldwg.github.io/lyscripts/lyscripts/data/lyproxify.html#exclude_patients) of the `lyproxify` function. 


--- 

### <kbd>global</kbd> `COLUMN_MAP` 

This is the actual mapping dictionary that describes how to transform the `raw.csv` table into the `data.csv` table that can be fed into and understood by [LyProX](https://lyprox.org). 

See [here](https://rmnldwg.github.io/lyscripts/lyscripts/data/lyproxify.html#transform_to_lyprox) for details on how this dictionary is used by the `lyproxify` script. 

It contains a tree-like structure that is human-readable and mimics the tree of multi-level headers in the final `data.csv` file. For every column in the final `data.csv` file, the dictionary describes from which columns in the `raw.csv` file the data should be extracted and what function should be applied to it. 

It also contains a `__doc__` key for every sub-dictionary that describes what the respective column is about. This is used to generate the documentation for the `README.md` file of this data. 


--- 

**Global Variables**
---------------
- **TNM_COLS**
- **EXCLUDE**
- **COLUMN_MAP**

---

### <kbd>function</kbd> `smpl_date`

```python
smpl_date(entry: str) → str
```

Parse date from string. 


---

### <kbd>function</kbd> `smpl_diagnose`

```python
smpl_diagnose(entry: str | int, *_args, **_kwargs) → bool
```

Parse the diagnosis. 


---

### <kbd>function</kbd> `robust`

```python
robust(func: Callable) → Optional[Any]
```

Wrapper that makes any type-conversion function 'robust' by simply returning `None` whenever any exception is thrown. 


---

### <kbd>function</kbd> `get_subsite`

```python
get_subsite(entry: str, *_args, **_kwargs) → str | None
```

Get human-readable subsite from ICD-10 code. 


---

### <kbd>function</kbd> `parse_pathology`

```python
parse_pathology(entry, *_args, **_kwargs) → bool | None
```

Transform number of positive nodes to `True`, `False` or `None`. 


---

### <kbd>function</kbd> `set_diagnostic_consensus`

```python
set_diagnostic_consensus(entry, *_args, **_kwargs)
```

Return `False`, meaning 'healthy', when no entry about a resected LNL is available or when the pathology report says it was healhty. This is a hack to tackle the issue described here: 

https://github.com/rmnldwg/lyprox/issues/92 


---

### <kbd>function</kbd> `extract_hpv`

```python
extract_hpv(value: int | None, *_args, **_kwargs) → bool | None
```

Translate the HPV value to a boolean. 


---

### <kbd>function</kbd> `strip_letters`

```python
strip_letters(entry: str, *_args, **_kwargs) → int
```

Remove letters following a number. 


---

### <kbd>function</kbd> `clean_cat`

```python
clean_cat(cat: str) → int
```

Extract T or N category as integer from the respective string. I.e., turn 'pN2+' into 2. 


---

### <kbd>function</kbd> `get_tnm_info`

```python
get_tnm_info(ct7, cn7, pt7, pn7, ct8, cn8, pt8, pn8) → tuple[int, int, int, str]
```

Determine the TNM edition used based on which versions are available for T and/or N category. 


---

### <kbd>function</kbd> `get_t_category`

```python
get_t_category(*args, **_kwargs) → int
```

Extract the T-category. 


---

### <kbd>function</kbd> `get_n_category`

```python
get_n_category(*args, **_kwargs) → int
```

Extract the N-category. 


---

### <kbd>function</kbd> `get_tnm_version`

```python
get_tnm_version(*args, **_kwargs) → int
```

Extract the TNM version. 


---

### <kbd>function</kbd> `get_tnm_prefix`

```python
get_tnm_prefix(*args, **_kwargs) → str
```

Extract the TNM prefix. 


---

### <kbd>function</kbd> `check_excluded`

```python
check_excluded(column: pandas.core.series.Series) → Index
```

Check if a patient/row is excluded based on the content of a `column`. 

For the 2022 CLB multisite dataset this is the case when the first column with the three-level header `("Bauwens", "Database", "0_lvl_2")` is not empty or does not contain the character `'n'`.
